Tutorial: Getting started (#590)
tinacms/tinacms.org: content/docs/getting-started/backends.md

---
title: Working with Backends
prev: /docs/getting-started/edit-content
next: null
---

You may have noticed that content changes don't persist on refresh. Every time the page loads, the `data` populates with the form's initial values. In order for the CMS to be useful, it needs to track and persist data changes with some sort of backend.

## Loading Content from an external API

For this example, we will use a [fake API](https://jsonplaceholder.typicode.com/) to fetch content and post changes. We will use the `loadInitialValues` function to fetch content.

**src/App.js**

```diff
//..

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- const pageData = {
-   title: 'Tina is not a CMS',
-   body: 'It is a toolkit for creating a custom CMS.',
- }
```

(hopefully that will render correctly)

We could consider removing this chunk of code in the diff in case people have an eslint rule that causes a compile error for unused code

function PageContent() {
  const formConfig = {
    id: 'tina-tutorial-index',
    label: 'Edit Page',
    fields: [
      //...
    ],
-   initialValues: pageData,
+   loadInitialValues() {
+     return fetch(
+       'https://jsonplaceholder.typicode.com/posts/1'
+     ).then((response) => response.json());
+   },
    onSubmit: async () => {
      window.alert('Saved!');
    },
  }

  //...
}

//...
```

> Notice how we removed `initialValues` in lieu of `loadInitialValues`, which fetches data asynchronously on form creation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Notice how we removed `initialValues` in favor of `loadInitialValues`, which fetches data asynchronously on form creation.
```

> You can use `initialValues` when your data has already been fetched or defined. For example frameworks like Next.js will load the data for you and pass it to the page component as props.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> You can use `initialValues` when your data has already been fetched or defined before your components mount. Typically you would use this if you prefer to fetch your initial data server-side, as we do in our [Next.js + GitHub example](https://tinacms.org/guides/nextjs/github/initial-setup)
```

> You can use `initialValues` when your data has already been fetched or defined. For example with Next.js, you can load data via `getStaticProps` and it is passed to the page component as props.

Reviewer 2: Rather the get into specifics:

```suggestion
You can use `initialValues` when your data has already been fetched or defined. For example frameworks like Next.js will load the data for you and pass it to the page component as props.
```

## Saving Content

Next we'll adjust the `onSubmit` function. When the editor clicks the 'Save' button in the sidebar, `onSubmit` will be called, sending the updated data back to the API:

**src/App.js**

```diff
function PageContent() {
  const formConfig = {
    id: 'tina-tutorial-index',
    label: 'Edit Page',
    fields: [
      //...
    ],
    loadInitialValues() {
      return fetch(
        'https://jsonplaceholder.typicode.com/posts/1'
      ).then(response => response.json())
    },
-   onSubmit: async () => {
-     window.alert('Saved!');
-   },
+   onSubmit(formData) {

> +    fetch('https://jsonplaceholder.typicode.com/posts/1', {

Reviewer: ```suggestion
+    return fetch('https://jsonplaceholder.typicode.com/posts/1', {
```

if we return a promise here the loading state on the save button will work properly (hard to notice since the API responds so fast)

+       method: 'PUT',
+       body: JSON.stringify({
+         id: 1,
+         title: formData.title,
+         body: formData.body,
+         userId: 1,
+       }),
+       headers: {
+         'Content-type': 'application/json; charset=UTF-8',
+       },
+     })
+       .then(response => response.json())

> +       .then(json => console.log(json))

Reviewer 2: Unintuitively `response.json` doesn't return JSON. It parses a string as if it's JSON and returns a javascript object.

```suggestion
+       .then(data => console.log(data))
```

## Adding Alerts

While our form is functional in terms of retrieving and saving content, the editing experience could be improved by additional feedback. What if the form failed to save? Currently, the editor would need to check the console to see that there was an error.

[CMS Alerts](/docs/ui/alerts) are useful for displaying quick, short feedback to the editor. Let's add a few to improve the feedback for saving content.

### The Steps

1. Access the CMS object through the `useCMS` hook.
2. Use the `info`,`success`, & `error` methods to trigger alerts with a custom messages.

**src/App.js**

```diff
//...

function PageContent() {
+ const cms = useCMS();
  const formConfig = {
    id: 'tina-tutorial-index',
    label: 'Edit Page',
    fields: [
      //...
    ],
    loadInitialValues() {
      //...
    },
    onSubmit(formData) {
+     cms.alerts.info('Saving Content...')
      fetch('https://jsonplaceholder.typicode.com/posts/1', {
        //...
      })
        .then((response) => response.json())
-       .then(json => console.log(json))

> +       .then((json) => {

Reviewer: ```suggestion
+       .then((data) => {
```

+         cms.alerts.success('Saved Content!');

> +         console.log(json);

Reviewer: ```suggestion
+         console.log(data);
```

+       })
-       .catch(e => console.error(e))
+       .catch((e) => {
+         cms.alerts.error('Error Saving Content');
+         console.error(e);
+       });
    },
  };

  //...
}

//...
```

> _Tip:_ Dispatching alerts can be powerful in combination with [CMS Events](/docs/events).

## Other backends

> Tina is fairly un-opinionated about how it receives data to edit, or where that data is stored. The backend you choose depends on your project and the React meta-framework you may be using. Currently, there are numerous packages to support Git & GitHub workflows, but Tina is designed to potentially work with any data source. We have also made working prototypes to source data from [Strapi](/guides/nextjs/tina-with-strapi/overview) and Contentful (not yet documented).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Tina is fairly unopinionated about how it receives data to edit, or where that data is stored. The backend you choose depends on your project and the React meta-framework you may be using. Currently, there are numerous packages to support Git & GitHub workflows, but Tina is designed to potentially work with any data source. We have also made working prototypes to source data from [Strapi](/guides/nextjs/tina-with-strapi/overview) and Contentful (not yet documented).
```

Please refer to the [guides](/guides) for in-depth information on setting up various backends. Also, refer to [the forum](https://community.tinacms.org/) to read about other developers' unique configurations. As always, reach out to the Tina Team on [the forum](https://community.tinacms.org/) if you have an integration or backend idea and would like guidance or feedback on how to get started.

## Final Notes

Tina is a toolkit to build your own custom CMS. It’s not a one-size-fits-all approach like a conventional CMS. We think the main aspects to consider when building a CMS are: constructing the editing interface, storing and managing data, and then integrating with various frameworks.

> We’d like to provide developers with control and flexibility in all these aspects related to building a custom CMS. Right now, we’re building from the ground up, trying to make a solid foundation with React and Git-oriented workflows, but that’s not the end of the story in terms of what’s possible with Tina.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We’d like to provide developers with control and flexibility in all these aspects related to building a custom CMS. Right now, we’re building from the ground up, trying to make a solid foundation with React and Git-oriented workflows, but that’s not the end of the story for Tina.
```

**Avenues to keep learning:**

- Gain clarity with our [FAQ](_Coming soon_)
- Set up [Inline Editing](/guides/general/inline-blocks/overview), or editing content directly on the page
- Configure more complex fields, such as [Blocks](/docs/plugins/fields/blocks) or the [Markdown Wysiwyg](docs/plugins/fields/markdown)
- Create new data files with [Content Creator Plugins](/docs/plugins/content-creators)
- Add Tina to a [Next.js Site](/guides/nextjs/adding-tina/overview)
- Adding Tina to a [Gatsby Site](guides/gatsby/adding-tina/project-setup)

Follow [Tina on Twitter](https://twitter.com/tina_cms) 🦙! If you're stoked on this project, please give us a 🌟 on the [GitHub repository](https://github.com/tinacms/tinacms).

> Stay up to date with the latest developments via [Release Notes](/blog) or reach out on [the forum](https://community.tinacms.org/) with ideas or questions. Interested in contributing? Get started via the [project README](https://github.com/tinacms/tinacms).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Stay up to date with the latest developments via [Release Notes](/docs/releases) or reach out on [the forum](https://community.tinacms.org/) with ideas or questions. Interested in contributing? Get started via the [project README](https://github.com/tinacms/tinacms).
```
